thanks the last pastor sponsoring a
portion of the video
[Music]
this is the world's first 1000
horsepower 2020 Supra and it's still
using the stock engine why is that so
surprising well when this car came out
people thought the engine was absolute
trash so why is this one with relatively
limited modifications able to make a
thousand horsepower well it comes down
to this man Stefan Papadakis and his mad
scientist level of ingenuity in today's
episode we're going to go into how
stefan disassembled this engine and
rebuilt it from the ground up we're
gonna look at how we use forged parts
and why the process of forging is so
important we'll see the reason why so
many stock parts were actually worth
keeping and how they stood up to that
amount of horsepower and finally my
favorite we're gonna look at how he used
lasers and 3d printed metal parts to
push this engine over the edge you can
3d print metal I didn't know that in
that super cool
so get ready oh boy I did why would I do
that
I got a save is that a
thanks the last pass for sponsoring this
portion of the video if you're as
obsessed with JDM cars as me you're
probably on a million different forms
and websites and all those passwords and
usernames get so confusing but I use
LastPass so I can keep all of those in
one place LastPass remembers and auto
fills your passwords on websites and in
apps on Android and iOS they make it
super convenient to just Bop around and
not have to worry about oh is this the
password for it where I put a number on
the end or where I put an exclamation
point none of that
LastPass has unlimited password storage
free cross-device sync and password
sharing which comes in handy when my
homeboys want to hop on the 5g trink
click the link and start using LastPass
today thanks to LastPass for sponsoring
that part of my video now we've seen new
supers before that swap in a more
powerful engine like a 2jz to get higher
horsepower but not this one so why did
Stephan Papadakis keep the german-born
engine that comes in the Supra well it's
because he loves a good engineering
challenge now if you don't know who Papa
daucus is this guy is an absolute legend
in the 90s at only 21 years old he built
the first tube chassis front wheel drive
drag car in the United States the dude
has put a NASCAR motor in a Scion he's
built some wild-ass cars with some
impressive engines and now he wanted to
get a thousand horsepower out of the
hated stock super engine the b-58 so
where do you start
well first you needed to know what it
was really capable of so he did what any
sensible efficient race team owner slash
car builder would do he took a brand new
2020 Supra with 500 miles on it and he
took it apart disassembling it down to
the bare block and by taking it apart he
can inspect each critical component to
determine its high horsepower worthiness
kind of like a crime scene investigator
four-engine he'd use his skills to 1
figure out how to get more horsepower
out of the b-58 powerplant and to what
any of the stock components be capable
of handling a thousand horsepower also
as a side note he was the first person
to document doing this thing I mean this
engine was so new that he had to call in
favors to his friends overseas to get
certain tools to take it apart and not
only that he didn't have some shop
manual or YouTube to help him out this
was a massive challenge this dude is
straight up organ trailing his way
through the b-58 engine anyways when
your goal is to get a thousand
horsepower how do you get there
alright so first let's talk about how
you get more power just overall in
general we could start off with our most
favorite of equations the donut equation
which is more air plus or fuel equals
more power and we're gonna focus on the
more air variable now the amount of hair
getting into your engine is the rate
limiting factor in our famed donate
equation you can sit there and you can
argue with me and you say hey Jeremiah
fuel is also a limiting factor but I
tell you you're gonna run out of air
before you run out of the ability to
dump more fuel in there and then you're
gonna lose the conversation it'll look
like a nerd so don't do it
so there are a few ways we can get more
air into the motor a one way is to
increase the displacement meaning we can
increase the volume of our cylinder so
we can do that by boring the cylinders
which is making them wider like that or
we can do it by stroking the engine by
changing out the crankshaft and that
makes the cylinder taller like that that
allows the piston to travel down the
cylinder further and therefore
increasing the volume of air it pulls in
a Papa Doc is he didn't go this route
and he didn't for a few good reasons
from the factory the all-aluminum d-58
cylinder walls are coated with an
electric arc wire spring and that
process starts out with a conductive
metal wire that they then heat up until
its melting point and then they take
that melted wire and they spray it on
the cylinder walls using high pressure
and once it's sprayed on it forms
a very thin layer of iron material about
0.3 millimeters thick and this layer is
extremely wear resistant transfers heat
really good and it reduces the amount of
friction on the piston rings now if you
were to go in for that cylinder you'd
essentially be removing that layer and
that's not good so what about stroking
the motor
well when Papa Doc is dismantled the
engine he took a good CSI look at the
crankshaft and it was a beefy one not
only was it beefy it was forged and I'm
gonna get into four parts and explain
why that's important in a second but for
now let's just know that there wasn't a
need to swap out the crank just yet so
if we didn't bore it or Stroke it to get
more air into the cylinders what did he
do well another way we can add more air
is by using forced induction systems we
can supercharge it we can turbocharger
hashtag glue scrapes now both of these
methods force more air into the
cylinders and the b-58 already comes
turbocharged so that's great but the
stock turbocharger can't deliver the
amount of air mass needed to make a
thousand horsepower you need a bigger
turbo to force more air in so Papa
darkus went with the biggest turbo
BorgWarner makes capable of flowing 110
pounds of air a minute when it's
spinning at its max rpm of a hundred and
seventeen thousand rpm now to give you
an idea of how much air that is say we
had a room that's ten foot wide by ten
foot tall by 10 foot long it could suck
all thousand cubic feet out of that room
in 41 seconds that's a lot of hair but
slapping a bigger turbo on the b-58
creates a bunch more stress on the
internal components of that engine and
when we say internals we're talking
about Pistons rods the crank the
camshafts the bearings anything that has
a force applied to it during the
combustion cycle now if we add in more
air and we added more fuel we create a
much bigger boom explosion inside the
combustion chamber the cylinders right
and that bigger combustion pushes the
piston down with a bunch more force and
if we're going from 335 horsepower which
the stock engine has 2,000 horsepower
almost three times as much we can assume
the forces acting on those internal
components it's also three times as much
so how do you make sure those internals
can hold up to all that added horsepower
well you make them out of a stronger
material and here is where we'll talk
about forged internals now there are a
lot of ways you can go about making
metal parts but today I'm gonna focus on
casting parts and forging parts so first
let's talk about the most common way of
making parts and that is casting so
casting is a process in which you take a
metal and then you heat it up until it
turns it to a liquid you then pour that
liquid metal into a mold that's in the
shape of your part you didn't let that
metal cool inside the mold where it
solidifies turns from a liquid to solid
and now you have your part so there are
three main ways of casting parts there's
sand casting which uses a mold from sand
there's investment casting which uses a
plaster mold and there's die casting
which uses high pressure to form your
part in between metal dies and the main
principle throughout all those methods
is really the same you heat up a metal
you pour it in a mold and you let it
cool and by the way humans have been
casting part support thousands of years
one of the oldest surviving cast parts
is a copula frog from 3200 BC all the
way from Mesopotamia now we still cast a
lot of parts today not only in the
automotive world but it things like your
cooking pans we got tools actually let
me grab a tool these are pipe wrenches
that are cast and they're really cheaply
made they even say china stamped on it
and they're pieces I've broken like five
of these there is a ton of stuff made
using the casting process and there's a
few reasons why you can cast extremely
large parts or parts with complicated
shapes you use casting when you need a
part made out of a specific outline you
can take your molten metals and you can
mix them together to achieve the
specific ratio of metal you need in your
final part and when you're trying to cut
down on costs once you have the mold
made you can essentially duplicate your
part much quicker casting is a great
way to pump out a lot of identical parts
cool that's gas so what is forging well
instead of heating metal until it melts
like in casting you start off with a
solid piece of metal and you shape it
using pressure and that pressure comes
from a hammer old-school style or a
pneumatic power hammer or a die which we
typically use nowadays and even like
casting there are a bunch of different
ways you can Forge parts and the reason
it's called forging is because when you
heat the metal up you use a forge to do
so and the most simplistic of terms a
Forge is just a really really hot oven
now you might have seen on TV swords
being made they're made using the
forging process a blacksmith he'll be
like hammering down on the sword putting
it in a forge till it gets hot pulling
it back out hammering it again and
reshaping the blade blacksmith are
friggin cool man welders and blacksmiths
toughs um so when gearhead say their
engine has forged internals we all nod
our head and were like yeah cool cool
man yeah that must be a good thing and
it is a good thing but why is the
forging process better than the casting
process well it comes down to grain
structure we're nerding out today boys
get ready now if we were to take a piece
of iron for example and put it under a
high-powered microscope we can see that
it has a crystalline structure meaning
those iron atoms have a very highly
ordered arrangement and when metals fail
is when those atoms slip against each
other so when you cast apart for example
the liquid metal has a grain structure
that goes in all sorts of different
directions and that is not good because
now you have a part with non-uniform
strength properties also there's always
a possibility when you cast parts that
you create internal voids due to gas
pockets your point liquid metal in and
air can get trapped in between the metal
and then as it solidifies you now have a
pocket of air in the middle of your part
that means different areas of the part
will have different densities which is
bad because now as the part cools it can
warp weakening the entire part as a
whole so with forged parts you're not
heating up your metal until it liquefies
which means you're not
introducing air pockets into your part
the grain those metal atoms maintain
their crystalline structure throughout
the entire part it's uniform and that is
very very good especially in parts that
are experiencing high amounts of stress
because the grain has a uniform
orientation it has a higher impact
strength and more resistance to fatigue
so not only our Ford parts stronger it
takes more time to make them the quality
of the starting material is usually
better and therefore it's more expensive
to make them so what does all this have
to do with this Supra well when you're
adding extra boost from the bigger turbo
there's a few weak links in your engine
when you apply that amount of excess
force talking about the Pistons the rods
and the head gasket so if this engine is
making a thousand horsepower
that means each cylinder is making about
866 horsepower that is a lot of
horsepower out of one cylinder that's
more horsepower than the entire engine
in a 2020 Corolla I mean what the heck
that's also a lot of pressure not only
pushing down on the piston but pushing
back up on the head there's a bunch of
forces trying to rip these parts apart
so they need to be made out of a
stronger material and that's why this
1,000 horsepower Supra used forged
internals the forged pistons were
specifically designed for this car and
they have coatings on the top and on the
side skirts and the top coating is put
on there to help resist heat on the Dome
of the piston and the coating on the
skirts help reduce the wear on the
cylinder bores and the rods they were
designed specifically for this motor
using 43:30 pre hardened chromoly steel
fortune if you're curious what that
number means good because I'm gonna tell
you
carbon and alloy Steel's use a
standardized four-digit number to
classify the type of steel and the first
two digits tell you the main type of
material so 43 tells us that it's a
nickel chromium molybdenum steel and the
last two digits they tell you the amount
of carbon present in the steel and
hundreds of a percent by weight so 30
means it's point three zero percent
weight carbon and that's all very good
and cool and you can impress your
friends with it but if you take anything
away from this is that these are
extremely well made forged parts now to
keep the head on tight remember we have
a lot more cylinder pressure now from
the added boost they needed special ARP
studs which allowed the head bolts to be
torqued down to 135 foot-pounds that
means with the 12 inch ratchet like this
you have to put a hundred and
thirty-five pounds of pressure to torque
those bolts average weight of a
twelve-year-old it's probably a hundred
and thirty-five freaking pounds happy
y'all watching this can't even lift 135
pounds we can I know y'all just at home
watching videos do some push-ups that
leads me to my next point and that is
the surprising amount of stock internals
used in this build I mean it uses the
stock head gasket the stock cams the
stock crankshaft to stock piston rings
even the stock rod in main bearings the
engineers over at Toyota / BMW
engineered the factory engine to be able
to withstand a lot of horsepower New Age
2jz anybody maybe I don't know I'm kind
of saying it I'm saying it is I'm saying
it's better don't fight me in the
comments come find me in my house we'll
have a verbal lashing tjs to jay-z's
better no no way bro b-58 better come
convinced me all dude you're so lucky I
can't come over there and whoop beer oh
you're lucky I can't come over there
will be too hard
I want to talk about a few of those
stock parts specifically the head gasket
the bearings and the piston rings
because to be honest I think it is quite
amazing they were able to use those
parts now first let's talk about the
head gasket of a head gasket function is
to create a seal in between the engine
block and the cylinder head and then you
may have heard of people blowing head
gaskets right to understand why that
happens we need to talk about
compression ratios no compression ratios
are actually pretty easy to understand
if you have your cylinder right yep and
there's a certain amount of volume in
that cylinder well a compression ratio
is basically the volume of that cylinder
when the piston is way down here and
then as the piston compresses all that
volume of air there's a little gap at
the top so it's the ratio of the volume
when the piston is down here to when the
piston is at the very top typically it's
in the range of seven to one eight to
one and high horsepower and race motors
that are running off race fuel it's in
the ten and a half to 11 to one ratio
but at the end of the day all that you
need to know is that that number
determines what kind and what type of
head gasket you can use so we use this
fancy fun equation we find out our final
compression ratio it's 39 to one and
remember that's not only the pressure
pushing down on the piston but pushing
up on the cylinder head so you need a
head gasket that can keep this seal
between the head and the block when that
pressure is that hot and in the case of
this 2020 Supra they can use the stock
head gasket which is pretty crazy giving
that this engine is putting out 40
pounds of boost to make that thousand
horsepower there are a bunch of factors
that go into blowing a head gasket a bad
tune meaning your air fuel mixture is
off too much heat pre-ignition etc etc
so a high compression ratio isn't the
only driving factor but regardless you
need a high quality head gasket in the
stock one
that the next stock internal on the
lists are the rod in the main bearings
and an internal combustion engine the
connecting rods they're attached at one
end of the piston on the other end
they're attached at the crankshaft and
then your crankshaft itself is attached
to the block so the rod bearings those
are the bearings placed in between the
rod and the crankshaft and the main
bearings those are placed in between the
crankshaft and the block and in the case
of this 2020 Supra those bearings have a
special coating and the reason they have
a special coating is because of the
start/stop function that comes standard
when you buy a Supra now a lot of cars
nowadays have this start/stop function
pull up to a red light and your car
shuts off well when this happens there's
no oil being pumped to coat those
bearings now this phenomena happens all
the time in cars without this stop-start
function but it's not as big of a deal
over the life of the engine because
you're not turning it on and off
multiple times during your commute to
work for example but in cars with this
feature it obviously happens a lot more
and those bearings are now experiencing
more friction and more wear because
they're lacking that oil so to combat
this these bearings are coated in the
2020s supra uses a polymer coated
bearing that not only improves the wear
resistant it increases the fatigue
strength compared to non coated bearings
and that is great when you're building a
high horsepower motor like the one in
this car
now the last stock component I want to
talk about are the rings and if you look
at a piston there are grooves that the
Rings are retained in and it's the rings
that are actually in contact with the
cylinder wall on a four-stroke engine
there are three types of rings you have
your compression ring you have your
wiper ring and you have an oil ring and
each of those rings serves a specific
function and we start at the bottom of
our piston closest to the skirt that is
the oil ring the oil ring is used to
remove excess oil from the cylinder wall
let's get all the oil getting splashed
up from underneath the crank returning
that oil using return holes that are in
the bottom groove of the piston now
above that oil ring is the wiper ring
and its main function is also to remove
some excess oil from the cylinder there
like squeeze use finally on top of that
is the compression ring and that keeps
the pressure confined in the cylinder
and also it's the job of all three rings
to transfer heat from the piston to the
cylinder walls and when you make more
horsepower you're creating more heat and
the ability of these rings to withstand
that heat and added compression is
really important to keeping a healthy
engine now this has been just a very
long-winded way of saying the internals
on the Supra are really really good
not too many engines out there can use
to stock crank cans head gasket piston
rings rod and main bearings in their
search for a thousand horsepower but
there's one thing in particular that
Papa Doc is needed to bypass that was
stuck and that is the direct injection
system so in our doughnut equation we've
already talked about air now we're going
to talk about fuel
now in a more conventional fuel
injection system that fuel sprayed into
the intake port or the manifold and then
that fuel is then pulled into the
combustion chamber along with the air
passing by the intake valve on its way
to the combustion chamber now with
direct injection the fuel doesn't go by
the intake valves it goes straight into
the cylinder and the reason we have
direct injection is pretty cool really
it improves combustion efficiency
it increases fuel economy and it lowers
the amount of emissions your car make so
direct injection is actually really cool
but unfortunately for Pappa DOCSIS the
aftermarket support for the 2020 super
direct injectors is not there right now
he needs to be able to dump a bunch more
fuel through them and be able to control
them and no one makes a system that can
do that so you gotta go with the more
traditional setup using fuel injectors
placed in the intake manifold six 2000
CC fuel injectors to be exact and
because the super uses direct injection
the factory intake manifold doesn't have
any ports for those injectors to go in
so a completely new intake manifold
needed redesigned and built and this was
maybe the scariest part of the entire
build to get a thousand horsepower they
needed this manifold to work if they
couldn't get it right they weren't going
to hit their mark of making a thousand
horsepower so what they did is they
laser scanned the original intake
manifold they then took that scan and
they put it into CAD software and they
designed it wrong it in 3d printed that
CAD model to test fit it on the actual
engine and then they finally 3d printed
the intake manifold using aluminum
that's right you get 3d print metal
people for living in the freaking future
this is so cool so how do you print
metal well you use lasers it's always
lasers guys
lasers fix everything it's a process
called selective laser melting and it's
really cool and fundamentally it's
pretty easy to understand now first you
start off with a 3d model right
and then you take that 3d part and you
section it into thousands of 2d layers
thousands of cross-sections and this is
an additive process so it's going to
build that part one cross section one
layer at a time now inside an SL in
machine you have a chamber that's filled
with metal powder and that metal powder
is spread across a base plate in a very
thin layer about two one thousandths of
an inch thick of metal powder that's
about half the size of a human hair
just think about the dust just dusting
putting dust on top of a of a metal
plate all right but it's metal dust okay
a laser inside the machine then fuses
that thin layer of metal powder sitting
on the base plate in the shape of your
first two-dimensional layer now the bill
plate drops down and a layer of metal
powder is then evenly laid across the
top of the first layer the laser then
comes by and it fuses the second layer
powder on top of the first and a process
repeats itself until you have all of
those 2d layers all of those 2d
cross-sections built up to make a 3d
part now just the plenum for the intake
was made out of six thousand nine
hundred and ninety-one layers that took
over 51 hours to make and because the
intake was so large and had to be broken
up into multiple pieces where it was
then welded together to form a single
piece this is by far the coolest part on
this car and what's even cooler is that
it worked I mean it was a huge
engineering challenge and they were able
to successfully make it that's the best
part
whenever your engineers something and it
works out great and that speaks to who
Papadakis is and why he did this build
in the first place hear it from the man
himself so for me I I love motorsports
but it's not always about the driver and
the championship and the car is going
around the track and seeing who's
winning I really love to see the vehicle
themselves and how they're built and
wished the teams on the highest levels
like Formula One and NASCAR and such
would share more of how the cars are
engineered and built to really see a lot
of that you know ingenuity that goes
into those
and then potentially even take some of
what we can learn from them sharing on
their race cars and apply it to the cars
that we built we want to thank Stefan
Papa raucous for giving us a bunch of
his time to talk about the Supra as well
as John Sybil who designed the body kit
on the Supra and the render we used
throughout the video thank you thank you
so much it's really great stuff and we
only dove into a fraction of this build
if you haven't already go to his YouTube
page where he goes in-depth I'm not just
the engine but the roll cage the
suspension setup anything and everything
you could imagine he has some seriously
great content on there all of us that
don't have watched his videos they are
really really great go support him too
and then dude we got donut every day of
the week now James has got a new show
it's called the d-list check it out
that's on Fridays so click like
subscribe and we here at bumper to
bumper we actually need your help if you
want your car's footage to be featured
on this show follow us on all our social
media accounts will be putting messages
out there letting you know which cars
we'll be featuring on the show in future
episodes and then you to possibly see
your car on an episode of bumper to
bumper so follow us send me a message if
you got a car that you want to see on
the show that's got a cool engineering
aspect to it bye for now
oh boy I didn't why would I do that I
gotta say is that as Supra and then do
the thing right
what in